---
title: "Post: Modified Date"
last_modified_at: 2016-03-09T16:20:02-05:00
layout: single
---

ommunication is less understood, although the discovery of more examples of this phenomenon has strengthened
the general notion that these processes
are more ubiquitous than previously thought33,57. These observations herald
the exciting prospect of reconstructing
the various inter-species small-molecule- based signalling cascades that drive social behaviour in environments. Although
the data are currently too fragmented
to be used in a global systems approach, the modelling of specific processes could constitute a proof-of-principle case study. To include this aspect of microbial interac- tions in global ecosystems biology, an integrated effort is needed to detect both the production of, and the response to, the plethora of small molecules that are pro- duced by these organisms. Environmental metabolomics approaches, combined with metagenomic, meta-transcriptomic58 and meta-proteomic59,60 data, should eventually allow the reconstruction of ecosystem- wide combined protein small-molecule networks, similar to those that have been achieved for single organisms (see Further information for a link to the sTITCH chemical–protein interactions resource61). This approach could ultimately result in the molecular modelling of community multicellular behaviour types other than quorum sensing, such as dispersal, nutrient acquisition and biofilm formation62.
spatial and temporal variation
previous studies have detected variation in species composition in various habitats, both spatially (reviewed, for example,
in REFS 35,63–65) and temporally (for exam- ple, REFS 66,67). spatio–temporal variation has been linked to variation in environmen- tal conditions35,68, even to the point at which environmental parameters can be predictive of species composition55. similar spatio– temporal variation has been observed from a functional point of view69. Comparative metagenomics approaches24,25,29 recently charted the molecular basis of spatial func- tional variation of environments from the kilometre25,42,70 to centimetre38 and even mil- limetre scale71 (FIG. 3), and with time-series metagenomics studies underway28, studying temporal (and spatio–temporal72) aspects should become possible at the molecular level. The recent development of phylochips, metagenome-based microarrays and high- throughput sequencing-based monitoring will further expedite the amount of dynam
